Add user facing changelog (#14437)
jupyterlab/jupyterlab: CHANGELOG.md

## 4.0

Below are the major highlights in JupyterLab 4.

### New text editor

CodeMirror, the text editor used for cells and file editors, has been updated to [CodeMirror 6](https://codemirror.net/). This brings important

> performance improvements as well as better customization capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
accessibility and performance improvements as well as better customization capabilities.
```

> CodeMirror, the text editor used for cells and file editors, has been updated to [CodeMirror 6](https://codemirror.net/). This brings important
> performance improvements as well as better customization capabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CodeMirror, the text editor used for cells and file editors, has been updated to [CodeMirror 6](https://codemirror.net/). This new version includes important performance improvements, better customization capabilities, and better accessibility.
```

> The editor settings have also been improved. Previously settings had to be individually set for each type of cell, the file editor, and the console editor. Now they are all set in one place, which makes it easier to use the default settings for all editors or change some settings for specific cases. For example, it is possible to hide the line numbers for markdown cells.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have also improved the editor settings. Previously, users had to customize settings separately for each type of cell, the file editor, and the console editor. Now, you can change your settings in one place. It is now easier to use the default settings for all editors and to change some settings for specific cases. For example, you can now hide line numbers only for markdown cells.
```

Developers can now provide editor extensions, like themes and programming language parsers, through new application registries.

### New extension manager

> Starting with JupyterLab 3, extensions can be installed via Python packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with JupyterLab 3, extensions can be installed via Python packages
(or other providers of [prebuilt extensions](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/extension/extension_dev.html#prebuilt-extensions)).
```

> In JupyterLab 4, building on this feature, the Extension Manager can now list and install extensions from [pypi.org](https://pypi.org/search/?c=Framework+%3A%3A+Jupyter+%3A%3A+JupyterLab).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In JupyterLab 4, building on this feature, the Extension Manager can now list and install extensions from [pypi.org](https://pypi.org/search/?c=Framework+%3A%3A+Jupyter+%3A%3A+JupyterLab).
This removes the build step from installation of extension when using Extension Manager.
```

> In JupyterLab 4, building on this feature, the Extension Manager can now list and install extensions from [pypi.org](https://pypi.org/search/?c=Framework+%3A%3A+Jupyter+%3A%3A+JupyterLab).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In JupyterLab 4, building on this feature, the Extension Manager now includes extensions from [pypi.org](https://pypi.org/search/?c=Framework+%3A%3A+Jupyter+%3A%3A+JupyterLab).
```

Developers can provide an alternative package repository to display their own set of extensions.

### Improved document search

The Search and Replace functionality has been improved with new features when searching in a notebook:

- Highlight matches in rendered markdown cells
- Search in selection
- Multi-line search
- Replace using regex capture-group references
- Replace while preserving case

### UI improvements

Some new elements have been added or changed in the UI:

- Rework the running kernels section

> - "Add cell" button at the notebook bottom

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "Add a new cell" button at the bottom of a notebook
```

> - Dialog to display keyboard shortcuts as in the Classic Notebook (use <kbd>CTRL+SHIFT+H</kbd>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Dialog to display keyboard shortcuts as in the Classic Notebook (use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>H</kbd>)
```

> - Display first line of cell input and outputs when they are collapsed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Display the first line of cell input and outputs when they are collapsed
```

### Accessibility improvements

> JupyterLab is not yet fully accessible. Currently the focus is on making Notebook 7 accessible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JupyterLab is not yet fully accessible. Currently, we are focused on making Notebook 7 accessible.
```

It might be good to clarify what you mean by "not yet fully accessible" and "accessible" — are we targeting a particular accessibility standard?

A big part of the code is shared, though, and the following accessibility improvements are in JupyterLab 4:

- Improved focus and keyboard navigation in the file browser
- Add more roles and labels to UI elements
- Main menu collapses to a hamburger menu if the web page is not wide enough to display all items.

### Performance enhancements

JupyterLab is now faster, thanks to the following improvements:

- CSS rules optimization: CSS selectors have been optimized to improve web browser performance when many elements are present on a page.

> - Upgrade to CodeMirror 6: Especially for notebooks with many cells, the new CodeMirror version is far more efficient than the previous version. Large notebook should now load faster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Upgrade to CodeMirror 6: Especially for notebooks with many cells, the new CodeMirror version is far more efficient than the previous version. Large notebooks should load more quickly.
```

- Notebook windowing: By rendering only the parts of a notebook that fit in the web browser viewport, JupyterLab is much more efficient. See an important note below.

> _Notebook windowing_ might add side effects with notebooks containing cells injecting new CSS styles or JavaScript. It may also be less convenient if some cell outputs are displaying [iframes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/iframe). If you have issues with notebook rendering, try changing the user setting _Notebook_ > _Windowing mode_ to `defer` or `none`. (`none` should be used as a last resort, because it disables all optimizations.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notebook windowing _might_ add side effects with notebooks containing cells injecting new CSS styles or JavaScript. It may also be less convenient if some cell outputs are displaying [iframes](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/iframe). If you have issues with notebook rendering, try changing the user setting _Notebook_ > _Windowing mode_ to `defer` or `none`. (`none` should be used as a last resort, because it disables all optimizations.)
```

### Real Time Collaboration

JupyterLab 3.6 already made significant improvements to the Real Time Collaboration (RTC) feature.

> The feature has now been to a separate repository: [jupyter_collaboration](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyter_collaboration).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The feature is now in a separate repository: [jupyter_collaboration](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyter_collaboration).
```

The rationale is to limit the dependencies for users who don't need RTC. Separating RTC also helps organizations using JupyterLab that do not meet the specific requirements regarding file content management.

> To enable RTC, install the `jupyter-collaboration` package with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable RTC, install the `jupyter-collaboration` package with either `pip` or `conda`.
```

- with pip: `pip install "jupyter-collaboration>=1.0.0a0"`
- with conda: _not yet available_

> Some highlights:
> 
> - Support displaying multiple cursors and selections
> - Support registration of new shared model types

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RTC highlights in the standalone `jupyter-collboration` package, version 1.0.0, include:

- Support for displaying multiple cursors and selections
- Support for registration of new shared model types
```

### For developers

Here are the main tool updates that may affect extension authors and developers:

- TypeScript v5
- Yarn v3
- React v18
- Lumino v2

> We also recommend NodeJS v18, the only version to remain supported in 2024 (see [Node release schedule](https://github.com/nodejs/release#release-schedule)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend using Node.js v18 or newer, because older versions will reach end of life in 2023 or earlier (see [Node release schedule](https://github.com/nodejs/release#release-schedule)).
```

Technically, Node.js 20 (released earlier this month) will also remain supported in 2024.

> To ease code migration to JupyterLab 4, developers can have a look at the [migration guide](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/extension/extension_migration.html). A few existing extensions have already been migrated and can be used as examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ease code migration to JupyterLab 4, developers should review the [migration guide](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/extension/extension_migration.html). A few existing extensions have already been migrated and can be used as examples:
```

> - the [Extensions Examples](https://github.com/jupyterlab/extension-examples/pull/225)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the [JupyterLab Extensions by Examples](https://github.com/jupyterlab/extension-examples/pull/225)
```

- Rework the running kernels section
- "Add a new cell" button at the bottom of a notebook
- Dialog to display keyboard shortcuts as in the Classic Notebook (use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>H</kbd>)
- Display the first line of cell input and outputs when they are collapsed

### Accessibility improvements

JupyterLab is not yet fully accessible. Currently, we are focused on making Notebook 7 accessible.
A big part of the code is shared, though, and the following accessibility improvements are in JupyterLab 4:

- Improved focus and keyboard navigation in the file browser
- More ARIA roles and labels were added to UI elements
- Main menu collapses to a hamburger menu if there is not enough space to display all items.

### Performance enhancements

JupyterLab is now faster, thanks to the following improvements:

- CSS rules optimization: CSS selectors have been optimized to improve web browser performance when many elements are present on a page.
- Upgrade to CodeMirror 6: Especially for notebooks with many cells, the new CodeMirror version is far more efficient than the previous version. Large notebooks should load more quickly.

> - Notebook windowing: By rendering only the parts of a notebook that fit in the web browser viewport, JupyterLab is much more efficient. See an important note below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Upgrade to MathJax 3: The mathematical equations renderer library has been been upgrade from v2 to v3 allowing faster rendering.
- Notebook windowing: By rendering only the parts of a notebook that fit in the web browser viewport, JupyterLab is much more efficient. See an important note below.
```

- Rework the running kernels section
- "Add a new cell" button at the bottom of a notebook
- Dialog to display keyboard shortcuts as in the Classic Notebook (use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>H</kbd>)
- Display the first line of cell input and outputs when they are collapsed

### Accessibility improvements

JupyterLab is not yet fully accessible. Currently, we are focused on making Notebook 7 accessible.
A big part of the code is shared, though, and the following accessibility improvements are in JupyterLab 4:

- Improved focus and keyboard navigation in the file browser
- More ARIA roles and labels were added to UI elements
- Main menu collapses to a hamburger menu if there is not enough space to display all items.

### Performance enhancements

JupyterLab is now faster, thanks to the following improvements:

- CSS rules optimization: CSS selectors have been optimized to improve web browser performance when many elements are present on a page.
- Upgrade to CodeMirror 6: Especially for notebooks with many cells, the new CodeMirror version is far more efficient than the previous version. Large notebooks should load more quickly.

> - Upgrade to MathJax 3: The mathematical equations renderer library has been been upgrade from v2 to v3 allowing faster rendering.

Author: ```suggestion
- Upgrade to MathJax 3: The mathematical equations renderer library has been been upgraded from v2 to v3 allowing faster rendering.
```
